Add the CPVM design spec for supporting Restore. (#112)
NuGet/Client.Engineering: Specs/CentrallyManagingNuGetPackageVersions-Restore.md

## Goals

Define and document the changes that need to be done to integrate Central Package Version management with the Restore (nuget restore, MsBuild restore and VS) flows.

## Non - Goals

1. This spec will not contain changes needed to support the new Visual Studio UI experiences (Edit, Consolidation etc).
2. This spec will not contain the design of the new / updated DotNet CLI commands.

## Scenarios

The following scenarios will be enabled when the proposed design changes will be completed.

1. Given an well formatted CPVM file `msbuild /t:restore`and `nuget.exe restore` will respect the package versions defined in the Directory.Packages.props.
2. The restore from Visual Studio will correctly use the information from CPVM file.
3. The support for Visual Studio experience will be co-owned with the Project System team. For the first phase the package reference read only experience should not be degraded.

## Requirements

The requirements are defined in the [feature spec](https://github.com/NuGet/Home/wiki/Centrally-managing-NuGet-package-versions). A summary of the requirements targeted only at this design are below.

> * It should not be possible to specify PackageReference with Version metadata at the project level. Otherwise an error is raised.

Reviewer: For a project that is opted in to CPVM, it should not be possible...

Author: Updated at https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/8950

      public bool EnforcedFromCentralVersion { get { return CentralDependency != null; } }

```

##### LockFile

The LockFile corresponds with the project.assets.json. It will have a new property added to represent the list of `ProjectFileTransitiveDependencyGroup'.
This list will be not empty only if there are transitive dependencies enforced by central package definition.

``` C#
public IList<ProjectFileTransitiveDependencyGroup> ProjectTransitiveDependencyGroups { get; set; };
```

##### LockFileFormat / LockFileBuilder

These types build read and write the project.assets.json. they will be updated to handle the new `projectFileTransitiveDependencyGroups` list.

#### Visual Studio Restore

Visual Studio Project System communicates with NuGet through four interfaces:

* `IVsSolutionRestoreService3`
* `IVsProjectRestoreInfo2`
* `IVsTargetFrameworks2`
* `IVsTargetFrameworkInfo2`

To support the new item type(`PackageVersion`) a interface need to be added;

``` C#

    public interface IVsTargetFrameworkInfo3 : IVsTargetFrameworkInfo2
    {
        /// <summary>
        /// Collection of central package versions.
        /// </summary>

>         IVsReferenceItems CentralPackageVersions { get; }

Reviewer: @nkolev92, should this be async?  For example:
```C#
Task<IVsReferenceItems> GetCentralPackageVersionsAsync()
```

Reviewer 2: This is meant to be a DTO of already processed data. So the motivation behind this is that this should return promptly.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/16580006/69378774-ea466900-0c63-11ea-8b5f-ba9f36c8c13f.png)

To enable this flow in addition to the mentioned above interfaces it will be needed to update the VsSolutionRestoreService to

1. Implement IVsSolutionRestoreService3
2. Update the ToDependencyGraphSpec to consume the CentralPackage version information and create the correct graph.
3. Possibly validate the nomination data.

#### Import of CPVM props file

Currently NuGet does not have a path on the props import. CPVM file will be imported following the same pattern as Directory.build.props.

#### Pack

1. The `PackTaskLogic` will need to be updated to consume the transitive dependencies.
2. Switch for opt-out of packing the transitive dependencies will need to be added.

### Error handling

1. A package dependency downgrade will be treated as an error with a new error code.
2. If projects will define PackageReferences with versions an error will be generated at the restore time. The validation logic will be done at the NuGet api logic.

### Telemetry

Telemetry events will need to provide enough information to answer to the questions below:

> 1. How many projects use CPVM?

Reviewer: Also, how many solutions use CPVM.

Author: Updated at https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/8950

## Non - Goals

1. This spec will not contain changes needed to support the new Visual Studio UI experiences (Edit, Consolidation etc).
2. This spec will not contain the design of the new / updated DotNet CLI commands.
3. Legacy Package Reference will not support pinning of the transitive dependency.

## Scenarios

The following scenarios will be enabled when the proposed design changes will be completed.

1. Given an well formatted CPVM file `msbuild /t:restore`and `nuget.exe restore` will respect the package versions defined in the Packages.props.
2. The restore from Visual Studio will correctly use the information from CPVM file.  

## Requirements

The requirements are defined in the [feature spec](https://github.com/NuGet/Home/wiki/Centrally-managing-NuGet-package-versions). A summary of the requirements targeted only at this design are below.

* It should not be possible to specify PackageReference with Version metadata at the project level. Otherwise an error is raised.
* There will be an opt-in/opt-out switch for projects to opt-in CPVM. [Default: Opt-in]

> * The Private Assets and the other PackageReference metadata except Version need to be defined at the project definition level.

Reviewer 2: This reads weird. 

They are defined at the PackageReference level. 
Maybe simplify it to that? 

The PackageReference does not have to be in the project file and I feel that's what this is suggesting.

Author: Updated.

* The Package versions defined in the Central Package Versions file are respected for direct and transitive dependencies.
* Pack command will pack the transitive dependencies if pinned through CPVM.
* The goal is to not regress Restore performance - performance data needs to be provided to make an informed decision before release.

## Solution

> It will be introduced a new `PackageVersion` MsBuild item type that will use be used to set the Central Package Version information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Introduce a new `PackageVersion` MSBuild item type that will be used to set the Central Package Version information.
```

Author: Updated

As mentioned in the feature spec the Include/Exclude assets need to be defined at the project level.

``` xml

<PackageVersion Include="Newtonsoft.Json Version="12.0.2" />

```

### Dependency graph spec changes

1. The direct package dependency versions will be the versions defined in the CPVM.
2. The Package spec will contain the list of the CPVM defined versions (snapshot below). Any direct dependency resolved through CPVM will not be included in the `centraldependencies` list.

``` json
   "frameworks": {
      "netcoreapp2.2": {
        "dependencies": {
          "EntityFramework": {
            "target": "Package",
            "version": "[6.2.0, )"
          },
          "Microsoft.NETCore.App": {
            "suppressParent": "All",
            "target": "Package",
            "version": "[2.2.0, )",
            "autoReferenced": true
          },
          "ParentLibTestCM1": {
            "target": "Package",
            "version": "[3.0.0, )"
          }
        },
        "centraldependencies": {
          "NUnit": {
            "target": "Package",
            "version": "[3.12.0, )"
          },

>           "Newtonsoft.Json": {

Reviewer 2: The rest of the spec calls out otherwise, remove the include :)

          "Newtonsoft.Json": {
            "include": "Compile, Native, BuildTransitive",
            "target": "Package",
            "version": "[12.0.2, )"
          }

Author: Updated

>             "include": "Compile, Native, BuildTransitive",

Reviewer 2: In general, the only metadata is the version one so you can write this as:

```json
        "centraldependencies": {
            "NUnit" : [3.12.0, ),
             "Newtonsoft.Json" : "[12.0.2, )
          }
```

Author: Updated.

            "target": "Package",
            "version": "[12.0.2, )"
          }
        },

```

### project.assets.json changes

1. The project spec changes mentioned above will be applied to the project.assets.json
2. It will be new element added to track the central defined packages that were transitively pinned. The information will be used by the pack command to include the pinned transitive packages as dependencies to the new nuspec.
Snapshot of the new element below. In this example Newtonsoft.Json is a transitive dependency that was pinned. The transitive dependency included assets will be restricted on the dependency chain. For example in the example below the Newtonsoft.Json was added through dependencies that had `... exclude="Runtime,Build,Analyzers">`

``` json

>    "projectFileTransitiveDependencyGroups": {

Reviewer 2: how about centrallyManagedTransitiveDependencyGroups? 

In like with the centralDependencies from the packagespec

Author: I think it is better. Updated.

      "frameworks": {
         "netcoreapp2.2": {
         "Newtonsoft.Json": {
         "include": "Compile, Native, BuildTransitive",
         "target": "Package",
         "version": "[12.0.2, )"
        }
      }
    }
```

### NuGet.targets

> 1. There will be a 'CollectCentralPackageVersion` target that will collect the central defined PackageVersion items.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion 
1. There will be a 'CollectCentralPackageVersions` target that will collect the central defined PackageVersion items.
```

Use plural: https://github.com/NuGet/NuGet.Client/blob/dev/src/NuGet.Core/NuGet.Build.Tasks/NuGet.targets#L169

Author: Updated.

> 2. The NuGet MsBuild task (`GetRestorePackageReferencesTask`) will be updated to process the central PackageVersion items.

Reviewer 2: I'd just add a separate task, but that's just my preference. 

We have one for PackageDownloads and ProjectReferences.

Author: Yes - I was thinking about this and actually I have created a different tasks in initial prototype. The pros for only one task is the will be less code duplication. During the implementation will see exact the differences.

3. The targets will include the below sequence for enabling the Update of current project PackageReference. The functionality depends on a [new feature](https://mseng.visualstudio.com/1ES/_workitems/edit/1649689) to be added in MsBuild. This is necessary to support the Legacy projects.

``` xml

> <ItemGroup Condition="'$(UsingMicrosoftNETSdk') != 'true'">

Reviewer 2: This probably needs to be within an item group conditioned on the opt in property, or contain the opt in property within the condition.

Author: That is correct - Updated.

  <!--
    Update PackageReference items for legacy project system 
    Only copy Version metadata in case user specified some other metadata
  -->
  <PackageReference Update="@(PackageVersion)" Version="%(Version)" />
</ItemGroup>

```

> **[Note]** The update above will work on the SDK style projects as well. In that case the merge of the two sets (planned to be done on the NuGet side) will be done automatically through MsBuild. However the MsBuild approach could be slower. The decision to use one or the other will be made based on perf data.

Reviewer 2: > The decision to use one or the other will be made based on perf data.

If you go with this, then you can't raise errors for metadata like Version on the PackageReference element. 
You also have duplication because we need to read the PackageVersion for the transitive dependencies. 

I'd say don't do this, just do the merging on NuGet side.

Author: I updated the Note.  And go with the merge on the NuGet side only.

4. There will be a new task (name to be decided) with the purpose of warning in case of the legacy projects in case that a central transitive dependency was not honored.

### Implementation

#### MsBuild / NuGet Restore

Flow of the central package information through NuGet types.

![RestoreFlow](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/16580006/69378663-ad7a7200-0c63-11ea-89a7-e469e0c33bd9.png)

##### TargetFrameworkInformation

PackageSpec definition depends on TargetFrameworkInformation. TargetFrameworkInformation will have a new property added that will store the central packages dependencies.

``` C#

>    public IList<LibraryDependency> CentralDependencies { get; set; }

Reviewer 2: Use a simple type, don'tm reuse LibraryDependency because it has overhead with more props.

Author: Updated with a CentralyDependecy type with only Name and VersionRange

The new properties are:

``` C#

      //It will be not null if the node was hijacked by a central dependency
      public LibraryDependency CentralDependency { get; set; }
      //The parent package may have a set of Included flags. Keep this information for pack command usage.
      public LibraryIncludeFlags InheritedLibraryIncludeFlags { get; set; }
      public bool EnforcedFromCentralVersion { get { return CentralDependency != null; } }

```

##### LockFile

The LockFile corresponds with the project.assets.json. It will have a new property added to represent the list of `ProjectFileTransitiveDependencyGroup'.
This list will be not empty only if there are transitive dependencies enforced by central package definition.

``` C#
public IList<ProjectFileTransitiveDependencyGroup> ProjectTransitiveDependencyGroups { get; set; };
```

##### LockFileFormat / LockFileBuilder

These types build read and write the project.assets.json. they will be updated to handle the new `projectFileTransitiveDependencyGroups` list.

#### Visual Studio Restore

Visual Studio Project System communicates with NuGet through four interfaces:

> * `IVsSolutionRestoreService3`

Reviewer 2: All of the 4 need a version bump...
IVsSolutionRestoreService4

Author: Did that below.

* `IVsProjectRestoreInfo2`
* `IVsTargetFrameworks2`
* `IVsTargetFrameworkInfo2`

To support the new item type(`PackageVersion`) a new set of interfaces need to be added;

``` C#

>    public interface IVsSolutionRestoreService4

Reviewer 2: These look ok overall...it's an incremental addition in line with the complexity of the previous ones. 

Curious what the feedback from project-system folks will be.

Author: Received feedback
-	Only create a IVsTargetFrameworkInfo3 and that’s it, don’t version the other interfaces. We did this previously but it was a mistake – the rest of VS takes the old version of the interface and casts it underneath to “light up” the old behaviour. 
o	Otherwise its too much churn everywhere.

-	CentralPackageReferences -> CentralPackageVersions

-	We’ll need a CollectPackageVersions target similar to the other CollectXXX targets we have.

Author: Updated the spec on this feedback

        int Count { get; }

        /// <summary>
        /// Retrieves a reference by name or index.
        /// </summary>
        /// <param name="index">Reference name or index.</param>
        /// <returns>Reference item matching index.</returns>
        /// <exception cref="ArgumentNullException">Thrown if <paramref name="index" /> is <c>null</c>.</exception>
        IVsTargetFrameworkInfo3 Item(object index);
    }

     public interface IVsTargetFrameworkInfo3 : IVsTargetFrameworkInfo2
    {
        /// <summary>
        /// Collection of central package references.
        /// </summary>
        IVsReferenceItems CentralPackageReferences { get; }
    }

```

The flow of metadata through NuGet in Visual Studio

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/16580006/69378774-ea466900-0c63-11ea-8b5f-ba9f36c8c13f.png)

To enable this flow in addition to the mentioned above interfaces it will be needed to update the VsSolutionRestoreService to

1. Implement IVsSolutionRestoreService3
2. Update the ToDependencyGraphSpec to consume the CentralPackage version information and create the correct graph.
3. Possibly validate the nomination data.

#### Import of CPVM props file

> Currently NuGet does not have a path on the props import. CPVM file will be imported following the same pattern as Directory.build.props.

Reviewer 2: Where will this be declared?

Author: For this i need to work with MsBuild team probably to be inline with their guidelines.

#### Pack

1. The `PackTaskLogic` will need to be updated to consume the transitive dependencies.
2. Switch for opt-out of packing the transitive dependencies will need to be added.

### Error handling

> 1. A package dependency downgrade will be treated as an warning as today but it will be a warning different by NU1605 used now to denote the downgrade dependency downgrade.

Reviewer 2: I thought the feedback from @ericstj and @dsplaisted was to not do this.

Reviewer 3: We think it should be a new error instead of a new warning.

Author: Why not being in sync with the current downgrade behavior?

Reviewer 2: The motivation is that downgrades lead to a spotty customer experience. 
People tend to ignore warnings, and then later that leads to runtime issues.

Currently the customers need to add a top level package to force a downgrade, requires a conscious customer decision. Allowing them to do so easily through centrally managed packages, does not put them in the best position to succeed.

Reviewer 3: - We think that downgrades should be errors (and they are promoted to errors in the .NET SDK)
- A different error code allows for a better experience (ie the message can do a better job explaining how to fix the issue, and we might also be able to add better tooling support to resolve these errors)

Author: I see your point of views. I spoke offline with @nkolev92 as well. I updated this doc  I will need to update the functional spec as well.

> 2. If projects will define PackageReferences with versions an error will be generated at the restore time.

Reviewer 2: Note that this won't work if the versions are applied at MSBuild as one of the ntoes above suggests.

Author: I do not follow. I will discuss offline.

Author: Discussed offline. The validation to be done at the NuGet api level rather in msbuild evaluation level.

### Telemetry

Telemetry events will need to provide enough information to answer to the questions below:

1. How many projects use CPVM?

> 2. How many projects had transitive dependencies that were pinned?

Reviewer 2: I'd love to see examples of how the transitive enforcement will work.
Specifically, downgrades.
What happens when a floating version is specified as the centrally managed version? How do transitives behave then?

Author: The floating version will be resolved the same as currently 12.0.* will be resolved to the highest version 12.0.*.
For example(please ignore the naming ) if a props file  is like

``` json
<ItemGroup>
    <CentralPackageVersion Include="Newtonsoft.Json" Version="12.0.*" />
    <CentralPackageVersion Include="EntityFramework" Version="6.2.0" />
    <CentralPackageVersion Include="ParentLibTestCM1" Version="3.0.0" />
    <CentralPackageVersion Include="NUnit" Version="3.12.0" />
  </ItemGroup>
```
Where the ParentLibTestCM1 has Newtonsoft.Json transitive with version 9.
And a project file has the following references:

``` xml
<ItemGroup>
    <PackageReference Include="ParentLibTestCM1" />
    <PackageReference Include="EntityFramework"/>
  </ItemGroup>
``` 

The assets and lock file(snapshots) like below

``` json 
libraries": {
    "EntityFramework/6.2.0": {
      "sha512": "ptGyXOf26qLrtn+2doAmylIlCxOnBJANwlyyLrXDmqIk9O18IzLWHyxDwwAyhgXkxmbiaA0WNpRy67WRReInBw==",
      "type": "package",
      "path": "entityframework/6.2.0",
      "hasTools": true,
      "files": [
        ".nupkg.metadata",
        ".signature.p7s",
        "content/net40/App.config.transform",
        "content/net40/Web.config.transform",
        "entityframework.6.2.0.nupkg.sha512",
        "entityframework.nuspec",
        "lib/net40/EntityFramework.SqlServer.dll",
        "lib/net40/EntityFramework.SqlServer.xml",
        "lib/net40/EntityFramework.dll",
        "lib/net40/EntityFramework.xml",
        "lib/net45/EntityFramework.SqlServer.dll",
        "lib/net45/EntityFramework.SqlServer.xml",
        "lib/net45/EntityFramework.dll",
        "lib/net45/EntityFramework.xml",
        "tools/EntityFramework.PowerShell.Utility.dll",
        "tools/EntityFramework.PowerShell.dll",
        "tools/EntityFramework.psd1",
        "tools/EntityFramework.psm1",
        "tools/about_EntityFramework.help.txt",
        "tools/init.ps1",
        "tools/install.ps1",
        "tools/migrate.exe"
      ]
....
"Newtonsoft.Json/12.0.3": {
      "sha512": "6mgjfnRB4jKMlzHSl+VD+oUc1IebOZabkbyWj2RiTgWwYPPuaK1H97G1sHqGwPlS5npiF5Q0OrxN1wni2n5QWg==",
      "type": "package",
      "path": "newtonsoft.json/12.0.3",
      "files": [
        ".nupkg.metadata",
        ".signature.p7s",
        "LICENSE.md",
        "lib/net20/Newtonsoft.Json.dll",
        "lib/net20/Newtonsoft.Json.xml",
        "lib/net35/Newtonsoft.Json.dll",
        "lib/net35/Newtonsoft.Json.xml",
        "lib/net40/Newtonsoft.Json.dll",
        "lib/net40/Newtonsoft.Json.xml",
        "lib/net45/Newtonsoft.Json.dll",
        "lib/net45/Newtonsoft.Json.xml",
        "lib/netstandard1.0/Newtonsoft.Json.dll",
        "lib/netstandard1.0/Newtonsoft.Json.xml",
        "lib/netstandard1.3/Newtonsoft.Json.dll",
        "lib/netstandard1.3/Newtonsoft.Json.xml",
        "lib/netstandard2.0/Newtonsoft.Json.dll",
        "lib/netstandard2.0/Newtonsoft.Json.xml",
        "lib/portable-net40+sl5+win8+wp8+wpa81/Newtonsoft.Json.dll",
        "lib/portable-net40+sl5+win8+wp8+wpa81/Newtonsoft.Json.xml",
        "lib/portable-net45+win8+wp8+wpa81/Newtonsoft.Json.dll",
        "lib/portable-net45+win8+wp8+wpa81/Newtonsoft.Json.xml",
        "newtonsoft.json.12.0.3.nupkg.sha512",
        "newtonsoft.json.nuspec",
        "packageIcon.png"
      ]

 "frameworks": {
      "netcoreapp2.2": {
        "dependencies": {
          "EntityFramework": {
            "target": "Package",
            "version": "[6.2.0, )"
          },
          "Microsoft.NETCore.App": {
            "suppressParent": "All",
            "target": "Package",
            "version": "[2.2.0, )",
            "autoReferenced": true
          },
          "ParentLibTestCM1": {
            "target": "Package",
            "version": "[3.0.0, )"
          }
        },
        "centraldependencies": {
          "Newtonsoft.Json": "[12.0.*, )",
          "NUnit": "[3.12.0, )"
        },
 .....

```

``` json 
Lock file 
....
 "NETStandard.Library": {
        "type": "Transitive",
        "resolved": "2.0.3",
        "contentHash": "st47PosZSHrjECdjeIzZQbzivYBJFv6P2nv4cj2ypdI204DO+vZ7l5raGMiX4eXMJ53RfOIg+/s4DHVZ54Nu2A==",
        "dependencies": {
          "Microsoft.NETCore.Platforms": "1.1.0"
        }
      },
      "Newtonsoft.Json": {
        "type": "Transitive",
        "resolved": "12.0.3",
        "contentHash": "6mgjfnRB4jKMlzHSl+VD+oUc1IebOZabkbyWj2RiTgWwYPPuaK1H97G1sHqGwPlS5npiF5Q0OrxN1wni2n5QWg=="
      }
    }

```

For downgrade exception I do not currently have a prototype.

### Future work

* dotnet CLI commands
* Visual Studio UI

### Alternative approaches considered

#### Use of Update MsBuild Item attribute

MSBuild SDK already provides a solution for centralized package version following a design using the MsBuild item Update attribute.
The same approach could not be followed because the need to support the pinning of transitive dependencies.  

#### CPVM file import

##### Import path

CPVM import can be done on the props path (before the project import) or targets path (after the project is imported).
While in a solution based on usage of the `Update` attribute the import needs to be done on the targets path in the current design there is not a need to import it on pros or targets. The MsBuild guidelines/recommendations is to import .props on the props path and targets on the targets path. In this context the decision was made to import the CPVM on the props path.

##### Directory.build.props

Directory.build.props is imported on the props path the same as CPVM file will be. Tools could automatically update the CPVM file and this is not a scenario desired for Directory.build.props.

#### Pining of transitive dependencies

> The users today can add direct dependencies to their projects if they need to force a specific version. Auto pinning of transitive dependencies was a feature desired by partner teams.

Reviewer 2: I think the overall pinning/enforcement approach needs to be elaborated in further detail.

Author: I added more explanations under the RemoteDependecyWalker
